.\" Manual page for quanta. View with: man ./docs/quanta.1
.TH QUANTA 1 "2026-06-28" "quanta 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
quanta \- from-scratch RISC-V (RV32) instruction-set emulator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B quanta
.RB [ \-\-version ]
.RB [ \-\-trace ]
.RB [ \-\-quiet ]
.RB [ \-\-cache [ =\fISIZE\fR:\fIWAYS\fR:\fIBLOCK\fR ]]
.RB [ \-\-pipeline ]
.RB [ \-\-memory=\fISIZE\fR ]
.RB [ \-\-max-steps=\fIN\fR ]
.RB [ \-\-gdb [ =\fIPORT\fR ]]
.RB [ \-\-signature=\fIFILE\fR ]
.RB [ \-\-disk=\fIFILE\fR ]
.RI [ program.elf ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B quanta
is a single-hart RISC-V emulator: 32 registers, a program counter, and a flat
little-endian memory driven by a fetch/decode/execute loop. It implements the
RV32I base integer ISA plus the M (multiply/divide), A (atomics), and
Zicsr/Zifencei extensions, the M/S/U privileged architecture with trap handling,
and Sv32 virtual memory. It also models a small platform reached through
memory-mapped I/O \(em a CLINT timer, a PLIC, a 16550 UART, and a virtio-mmio
block device serving the
.B \-\-disk
image \(em and delivers
timer, software, and external interrupts. At boot it hands the guest a flattened
device tree (\fBa0\fR = hart id, \fBa1\fR = DTB pointer) describing that hardware,
and it services an S-mode guest's environment calls as M-mode SBI firmware
(console, timer, and system reset), so a supervisor kernel can run on it.
.PP
Given
.IR program.elf ,
quanta loads that static little-endian RV32
.B ET_EXEC
image and runs it from its entry point, servicing the
.BR write (2)
and
.BR exit (2)
system calls through the built-in execution environment until the guest installs
its own trap handler. With no argument, a small built-in demo program runs
instead \(em a toolchain-free smoke test. The guest's exit status becomes
quanta's own (see
.BR "EXIT STATUS" ).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version (\fBquanta\fR \fIX.Y.Z\fR) to standard output and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-trace
Narrate each executed instruction to standard error: the PC, the raw word, its
disassembly, the registers it changed, and the redirect target on a taken
branch, jump, or trap. The guest's own output on standard output stays clean.
.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Suppress all driver output (banner, summary, reports, register dump), leaving
only what the guest itself writes \(em so the output lines up byte-for-byte with
a reference simulator for differential testing.
.TP
.BR \-\-cache [ =\fISIZE\fR:\fIWAYS\fR:\fIBLOCK\fR ]
Model a set-associative LRU L1 cache over the run's data accesses and print a
hit/miss summary at exit. The geometry defaults to
.BR 1024:2:32 ;
all three values must be powers of two with
.IR "SIZE = sets * ways * block" .
This is an observability layer and never changes results.
.TP
.B \-\-pipeline
Print a 5-stage pipeline cycle/CPI estimate at exit, charging load-use and
control-hazard stalls under a forwarding, predict-not-taken model. Also an
observability layer; it composes with
.BR \-\-cache .
.TP
.BI \-\-memory= SIZE
Size the guest RAM region to at least
.I SIZE
bytes (an optional
.BR K ,
.BR M ,
or
.B G
suffix multiplies by 1024, 1024\(mu1024, or 1024\(mu1024\(mu1024). When the ELF
image plus its stack is smaller, the spare RAM lands above the image for an
OS-style guest to manage, and the boot device tree's
.B /memory
node reports the true size. Omitted, the region is sized to the image as before.
.TP
.BI \-\-max-steps= N
Cap the run at
.I N
retired instructions as a runaway guard (an optional
.BR K ,
.BR M ,
.BR G ,
or
.B T
suffix multiplies by a power of 1000). The default is 100 million; pass
.B 0
to remove the cap, which an interactive full-system guest (a booting OS) needs,
since it legitimately runs billions of instructions.
.TP
.BR \-\-gdb [ =\fIPORT\fR ]
Start a GDB remote stub on TCP
.I PORT
(default
.BR 1234 ),
bound to localhost, and wait for a debugger to connect before running. A stock
.BR gdb (1)
then attaches with
.RB \(lq "target remote :" \fIPORT\fR \(rq
to read and write registers and memory, set breakpoints, single-step, and
continue. This mode drives execution itself, so it does not combine with
.B \-\-trace
or
.BR \-\-pipeline .
.TP
.BI \-\-signature= FILE
Dump the architectural-test signature region (the words between the
.B begin_signature
and
.B end_signature
ELF symbols, lowest address first, one eight-digit hex word per line) to
.IR FILE ,
or to standard output for
.BR \- .
This makes quanta a drop-in target for the RISC-V architectural tests.
.TP
.BI \-\-disk= FILE
Attach
.I FILE
as a raw block-device image, read wholly into memory. The emulated virtio-mmio
block device (qemu
.B virt
layout, PLIC source 1) serves it as a disk, so a full-system guest can mount it
as a root filesystem. Writes hit the in-memory image and do not persist to
.IR FILE .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
The guest exited cleanly with status 0, or
.B \-\-version
was given.
.TP
.IR n " (1\(en255)"
The guest exited via the
.BR exit (2)
syscall with that status (its low 8 bits).
.TP
.B 1
An abnormal stop \(em ebreak with no debugger, an illegal instruction, an
unknown syscall, an out-of-range memory access, the instruction-count safety
limit, a failed program load, a signature-dump error, or a GDB stub that could
not bind its port.
.TP
.B 2
A command-line usage error (unknown option, malformed
.B \-\-cache
geometry, missing
.B \-\-signature
file, or too many arguments).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run a compiled program:
.B quanta program.elf
.TP
Trace execution, matching \fBobjdump \-d\fR mnemonics:
.B quanta \-\-trace program.elf
.TP
Estimate cache and pipeline behaviour:
.B quanta \-\-cache=2048:4:64 \-\-pipeline program.elf
.TP
Debug a guest from gdb over a remote connection:
.B quanta \-\-gdb=1234 program.elf
.SH FILES
.TP
.I program.elf
A static, little-endian RV32
.B ET_EXEC
executable (built, for example, with
.BR "\-nostdlib \-nostartfiles \-Ttext=0x80000000" ).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR objdump (1),
.BR qemu-riscv32 (1),
.BR gdb (1).
The full design notes and roadmap ship with the source in
.B CLAUDE.md
and
.BR ROADMAP.md .
.SH AUTHOR
Quanta is a learning project; see the repository at
.UR https://github.com/AustinJiangg/quanta
.UE .
